## Class 16
#### Capacitor Review
Voltages and batteries produce a voltage in their own distinct ways. 
There are other ways of getting a voltage...

With a capacitor, current technically moves through (flow), the charges are equal at any given moment.
No energy is theoretically spent, and good capacitors have no resistance, therefore.

As the persistent current flows, the charges "build up". This means the voltage it collects is proportional to the current and time. 

The capacitance is a measurement of how much voltage is collected per coulomb. Smaller capacitance, voltage builds quicker.
$Q$ (Charge quantity, amount of coulomb) $=C$ (Capacitance, farads) $V$(Voltage)

When this voltage is discharged, the flow of current is determined by Ohm's law. The time it takes for all the stored voltage to reach zero is dependent on the capacitance and the resistance of the circuit it is connected to.
#### Inductors
A current always produces a magnetic field.
Constructed solely of conductor (wire) wound into a small space.
```tikz
\usepackage{circuitikz}

\begin{document}
\begin{circuitikz}[american, scale=2, font=\Large]
	\draw(0,0)
	to[cute inductor, i_<=$i$]++(0,2);
\end{circuitikz}
\end{document}
```


The energy in the inductor depends on the size of the current ($i^2$) but **not** the direction. It is not charging anything, but the more current that flows, the more energy in the inductor.
The inductor resists a change in current. If you try to increase the current, the inductor will produce a voltage **against you**. This is called magnetic induction.

When a conductor is wound into a tiny space, it has increased magnetic field to create this phenomenon.
If current is constant, the voltage of the inductor will not change. If the rate of change of current is non-zero, the voltage will be produced.

$$V_{L} \propto \frac{di_{L}}{dt}$$

In the below example, the moment the switch is closed ($t=0$), the inductor will simply give $V_{s}$. 
As time goes on, the inductor will 
```tikz
\usepackage{circuitikz}

\begin{document}
\begin{circuitikz}[american, scale=2, font=\Large]
	\draw(0,0)
	to[vsource, invert, V=$V_s$]++(0,2)
	to[R=$R$, a=$\Delta V$]++(1,0)
	to[switch]++(1,0)
	node[label=right:$+ (V_s-\Delta V)$]{}
	to[cute inductor, l=$L$]++(0,-2)
	node[label=right:$-$]{}--(0,0);
\end{circuitikz}
\end{document}
```
$L$ is the measurement of inductance:
$$V_{L} = L \times\frac{di_{L}}{dt}$$


```tikz
\usepackage{circuitikz}

\begin{document}
\begin{circuitikz}[american, scale=2, font=\Large]
	\draw(0,0)
	to[vsource, invert, V=$V_s$]++(0,2)
	to[R=$R_1$]++(1,0)
	node[ocirc, label=above:$A$](A){};
	
	\draw(2,2)
	node[ocirc, label=above:$B$](B){}
	to[R=$R_2$]++(1,0)--++(0,-2)--(0,0);
	
	\draw(1.5,0)
	to[cute inductor, l=$L$]++(0,1.5)
	node[spdt, rotate=90](myspdt){}
	(myspdt.out 1)--(A)
	(myspdt.out 2)--(B);
\end{circuitikz}
\end{document}
```

When the switch is moved to $B$ the current flow changes, so the voltage generated by the inductor changes.

```tikz
\usepackage{circuitikz}

\begin{document}
\begin{circuitikz}[american, scale=2, font=\Large]
	\draw(0,0)
	node[label=left:$+$]{}
	to[cute inductor, l=$L$]++(0,2)
	node[label=left:$-$]{}
	to[R=$R_2$, i<_=$i$]++(2,0)--++(0,-2)--(0,0);
\end{circuitikz}
\end{document}
```
#### Capacitor/Inductor Relationships
The moment the switch is closed the current starts at $\frac{10V}{5\ohm}$ because there is 0V potential at the positive terminal of the cap.
As the voltage in the cap builds, the potential difference reduces because the voltage difference from $V_s$ to $V_c$ is smaller. Therefore the current decreases.
$$i_c(t) = C\times \frac{dV_c}{dt}$$
Note the parallel with the inductor circuit and the rate of change of current.
$$V_L(t) = L\times \frac{di_L}{dt}$$
```tikz
\usepackage{circuitikz}

\begin{document}
\begin{circuitikz}[american, scale=2, font=\Large]
	\draw(0,0)
	to[vsource, invert, V=$V_s\ (10V)$]++(0,2)
	to[switch]++(1,0)
	to[R=$R$, a=$5\Omega$]++(1,0)
	node[label=right:$+$]{}
	to[capacitor, l=$V_c$, a=$2F$]++(0,-2)
	node[label=right:$-$]{}--(0,0);
\end{circuitikz}
\end{document}
```
Remember:
$$\tau = R\cdot C = 1000\ohm(0.000001F) = 0.001s = 1ms$$
$$V_{cap}(t) = V_{final} + (V_0 - V_{final})e^{-t/\tau}$$
The time constant increases when the resistance **or** the capacitance is larger.

An inducter also has a time constant: $\tau = \frac{L}{R}$ The point where it has reached $e^{-1}$ of  maximum current.

#### AC Through the Lens of Capacitance
```tikz
\usepackage{circuitikz}

\begin{document}
\begin{circuitikz}[american, scale=2, font=\Large]
	\draw(0,0)
	to[sV, l=$V_o cos(wt)$]++(0,2)
	node[label=above:$+$]{}
	to[R=$R$, a=$V_R$]++(2,0)
	node[label=above:$-$]{}
	to[capacitor, l=$V_c$]++(0,-2)--(0,0);
\end{circuitikz}
\end{document}
```

If you increase the frequency, the capacitor will charge to a voltage that is smaller and smaller.
Slower frequency, the capacitor has time to charge up and down with the source.
This essentially filters out the high frequency.
